---
title: Cryptocurrency Basics
parent: introduction
order: 2
---

## Cryptocurrency Basics

Before giving a definition of a cryptocurrency, let's talk about why we care
about digital currencies in general and cryptographic currencies in particular.

### Why Do We Care?

#### Speed

As opposed to conventional (also known as fiat), centrally banked currencies,
such as the Yen or the American Dollar, digital currencies do not require a
banking system to move value. With this restriction lifted, working with digital
currencies is much faster than working with banking, especially on a global
scale. Transferring 10 USD from Osaka to Denver no longer takes days when a
digital currency is used. All transactions are made rapidly regardless of the
distance.

#### You Own Your Money

All that a commercial bank account owner is given is a promise of being paid a
certain amount of money within a reasonable amount of time after receiving a
payout request. Banking systems also have limits to any volume of value being
moved, rendering an individual unable to withdraw or transfer large amounts
quickly. In case of cryptocurrencies, the person who holds a special kind of
information called *a secret key* can spend the money at will. No other entity
has a power to manipulate the value that a user owns.

#### Pseudonymity

One can have as many cryptocurrency addresses as they wish, receiving and
spending money from different addresses as per their purpose. A merchant running
an E-Commerce shop can have a set of addresses for receiving money and issuing
refunds, and a separate personal "wallet" for their own needs. A single interface is used
to control all of these wallets, and there is no need to log in to several
payment platforms, which makes the process very time-efficient.

#### Security

Your money is as secure as the *secret key* that allows spending it. This means
that storing your secret key on a USB flash drive in a safe is equivalent to
having banknotes in a safe. Absolutely nobody can steal this money even by
carrying out a successful cyberattack.

#### Extensibility

Using an approach known as [*side
chains*](https://www.blockstream.com/sidechains.pdf), general purpose
cryptocurrencies such as Cardano SL or Bitcoin can enable domain specific
cryptocurrencies, such as Ethereum Classic. This way, any innovation developed
via domain specific cryptocurrency can have participants who hold value in a
general purpose cryptocurrency. Examples of such applications are identity
management, gaming and gambling, and verifiable computations.

### What is a Cryptocurrency?

Cryptocurrency is a form of digital currency that uses cryptography to
manipulate value. Cryptography provides a way to generate proof of genuine
authenticity of any kind of information. This is called *digital signing*. In
cryptocurrencies we generate a ledger (a database which provides information on
how much money each address has) by signing and sending transactions to the
network and receiving blocks of confirmed transactions. Cryptocurrencies are
normally decentralized, meaning that many people from all over the globe
participate in ledger generation by running cryptocurrency nodes. Thus, a
consensus about the state of the ledger has to be achieved. Two most significant
approaches for achieving such consensus are discussed in the next section.